https://support.goodaccess.com/getting-started/1.-what-is-goodaccess


1. What is GoodAccess?

Discover what GoodAccess is, how it works, and what makes it unique. Learn about its features, benefits, and why it's a top choice for secure remote access.

GoodAccess is a cybersecurity platform (SASE/SSE) that empowers enterprises to easily implement Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA) in their infrastructure, regardless of its complexity or scale.

By leveraging a low‑code/no‑code approach, GoodAccess delivers a hardware-free, rapid deployment solution within hours or days, allowing companies to enhance their security without the need for in‑house IT experts.

Our platform ensures seamless integration with modern SaaS/cloud applications as well as legacy systems, protecting critical assets for remote and hybrid workforces. GoodAccess serves businesses across diverse industries, particularly those adopting multi-cloud and SaaS environments.
What does GoodAccess do?

GoodAccess protects the customer’s infrastructure under one zero-trust umbrella, regardless of how complex, heterogeneous, or widespread it is. It is a good fit for companies supporting full‑remote or hybrid modes of work using both company‑issued and employees’ own devices. The low‑code/no‑code, cloud‑based SASE platform allows businesses to create and manage zero trust architecture easily.

In today’s cybersecurity landscape, this is an essential part of any organization’s security, and a highly effective enabler of regulatory compliance.

The GoodAccess platform combines several latest technologies to tackle the most pressing cybersecurity challenges of today.

    Remote access and BYOD - Device security enforcement with device inventory and posture checks.

    Multi-factor authentication (MFA) - Unified MFA solution for all critical systems, including legacy applications.

    Identity-based access control (IAM/FWaaS) - Zero‑Trust Architecture enabling control of all access by identity (SSO/SCIM).

    Network encryption and segmentation - Segmentation at maximum granularity radically reduces the attack surface.

    Full control and visibility - Security logs and reports from across the entire organization with SIEM integration.

What makes GoodAccess unique?

GoodAccess stands out by its usability‑first design. It is an all‑SaaS, zero‑hardware platform that fits any infrastructure to deliver network‑based Zero‑Trust Architecture (SDP) without the need for an IT expert on staff.

Our key uniquenesses include:

    Simplicity - Low-code/no-code/no-hardware platform for organizations of all sizes.

    Market-leading deployment time - GoodAccess only takes hours or days to deploy.

    Infrastructure-agnostic - Deployable over any existing infrastructure.

    Easy management - No certified IT experts needed.

    Zero Trust on network layer - Allows for simple integration of legacy applications.

    Based in the EU - Ideal cybersecurity provider for NIS2 compliance.
